Vancouver Crime Prediction Report
================
Ramiro Francisco Mejia, Jasmine Ortega, Thomas Siu, Shi Yan Wang </br>
2021-12-09

-   [Summary](#summary)
-   [Introduction](#introduction)
-   [Methods](#methods)
-   [Data](#data)
-   [Analysis](#analysis)
    -   [EDA](#eda)
    -   [Data cleaning](#data-cleaning)
    -   [Data transformation](#data-transformation)
    -   [Finding the best performing
        model](#finding-the-best-performing-model)
    -   [Hyperparameter tuning](#hyperparameter-tuning)
-   [Results and Discussion](#results-and-discussion)
-   [References](#references)

## Summary

In this project, we attempted to create a classification prediction
model to predict the types of crimes that happens in Vancouver, BC based
on neighborhood location and time of the crime. Based on our EDA results
and model tuning, including necessary data cleaning tasks, we identified
that the Logistic Regression model performed the best among all the
models tested based on f1 score. The performance of predicting the
results of the unseen data was not satisfied, that we believed was due
to the lack of associations between the features (Time and Location) and
crime type. We proposed further improvements in the future iterations of
model optimisations, such as including adding relevant data from outside
score (i.e. Vancouver weather, Vancouver housing etc).

## Introduction

Crime is a daily occurrence in large cities, and Vancouver is no
exception to this rule. While crime is impossible to avoid in a large
metropolitan city, we are interested in seeing if the categories of
crimes and timing of crime can be correlated with certain neighborhoods
in Vancouver. The information is useful for the police to strengthen
specific skillsets to cater specific law-breaching activities in
different areas. Also, local government officials can utilize the
prediction to adjust related policies. This project is for educational
purposes only and should not be used to predict crime in real life.

## Methods

The Python programming language (Van Rossum and Drake Jr 1995) and the
following Python packages are used to perform the analysis: Pandas
(McKinney et al. 2010), Numpy (Harris et al. 2020), Sci-Kit Learn
(Pedregosa et al. 2011), Altair (VanderPlas et al. 2018),
dataframe_image (Petrou 2018) and docopt (de Jonge 2018).

The code used to perform the analysis and create this report can be
found here:
<https://github.com/UBC-MDS/DSCI_522_Crime_Prediction_Vancouver/blob/main/src/modelling.ipynb>

## Data

The data was collected by the Vancouver Police Department (The Vancouver
Police Department 2021) from 2003 to 2021 and is a log of all crimes
committed. Each row in the dataset represents the crime committed, the
time of day, neighborhood, the hundreds block the crime occurred on, as
well as the X and Y coordinates of the crime location. It is updated
weekly by the VPD, but there is about a two to three month lag in
logging present day crime. To simplify our analysis and prediction
modelling, we utilized the data between year 2016 to 2020.

## Analysis

### EDA

In our initial exploratory data analysis, the relationship between
neighborhoods and types of crime was examined. From the heatmap below,
the Central Business District (compromising of the downtown area)
appears to be the most active neighborhood for crime against all
neighborhoods.

<img src="../src/figure-eda/crime_correlation.png" width="90%" />

Figure 1. Heatmap of Crimes and Neighborhood

This observation was formalized by the histogram below. The Central
Business District, followed by neighboring West End, Mount Pleasant,
Strathacona, and Fairview are the neighborhoods with the most crime
logged by the VPD.

![](../src/figure-eda/crime_top5.png)

Figure 2: Top 5 Neighborhoods with Crime

### Data cleaning

Additionally, we examined the distribution of crimes committed against
hours. A significant amount of cases happened in hour 0. However, this
appeared to be an issue within the dataset. It appeared many crimes
logged at 0 AM as a default in cases where the original time of the
crime is unknown or not available. Also, based on the data description
provided by the VPD, the hour information was based on the findings of
the police investigation. See
[here](../data/raw/VPD%20OpenData%20Crime%20Incidents%20Description.pdf)
for the data specification. Thus we assumed some examples falling into
hour 0 could have happened in other time in the same day. To counteract
this imabalance, data re-balancing was done by averaging out the cases
from 0 am and re-distributing into 24 hours.

<img src="../src/figure-preprocess/data_before_balance.png" width="50%" />

Figure 3. Data Before Rebalancing

<img src="../src/figure-preprocess/data_after_balance.png" width="50%" />

Figure 4. The data after rebalancing

### Data transformation

Prior to model fitting, the data was preprocessed via column
transformers. SimpleImputer and OneHotEncoder were applied to the
categorical feature, “Neighbourhood.” OneHotEncoding was used for the
date components, “Year,” “Month,” “Hour” and “Minute.” And finally,
SimpleImputer and StandardScaler were applied to “X”and “Y,” which are
coordinate points of the crime location.

### Finding the best performing model

We decided to use f-1 score as our main scoring method that was
applicable to multi-class classification problem (Tharwat 2020). The
LogisticRegressor algorithm was used to classify the different
categories of crimes in Vancouver. It performed best out of the four
models tested, which included DummyClassifier (to set a baseline score),
RandomForestClassifier, and RidgeClassifier. As seen below in figure 5,
RandomForest performed the best in the test score (0.503) however it was
overfitted. LogisticRegressor yielded a similar score (0.491) which was
fractionally higher than RandomForest and RidgeClassifier.

<img src="../results/models_results_cv.png" width="80%" />

Table 1. Model Results based on f1 score

### Hyperparameter tuning

For LogisticRegression, hyperparameters `C` and `class_weight` were
optimized via RandomizedSearchCV to maximize f-1. The best model
performed using `C = 100` and `class_weight = None`.

-   Note: due to the time complexity of the model, the hyperparameter
    optimization took a significant amount of time to complete.
    RandomizedSearchCV returns the best parameters it can find in a set
    amount of time, so it’s possible that these are not the best
    parameters overall, but the best parameter that could be fit in the
    given time frame.

<img src="../results/best_LR_model.png" width="30%" />

Table 2. Model Results

## Results and Discussion

We conducted the prediction with the best performing model identified
after hyperparameter tuning. The result was assessed through the
confusion matrix shown below. The confusion matrix can be interpeted as
a heatmap, with the number of true positives predicted along the
diagonal from top left to bottom right. The model rarely predicted true
positives for each label, except those that contained the most sample in
the data set, i.e. `Theft from Vehical` and `Other Theft`.

<img src="../results/confusion_matrix.png" width="200%" />

Figure 5. Confusion Matrix of LogisticRegressor performance on test data

Furthermore, based on the classification report of breaking down
individual precision, recall, f1-scores, and support score, there is
further confirmation of the model’s poor performance, where some of the
classes had zero success in prediction ( `Homicide`, `Theft of Vehicle`,
`Vehicle Collision (with Fatality)`).

<img src="../results/classification_report.png" width="80%" />

Table 3. Classification Report of Targets

Overall, the model created performs poorly on the test and training
data. This model would not generalize well on unseen data, and thus
could be improved upon in future updates.

Ultimately, the most likely explanation for the model’s poor performance
is the quality of input data used. Even with data re-balancing to handle
the 0 AM imbalance and hyperparameter optimization, the model did not
improve much. To further improve the model in the future, feature
engineering could be used to optimize/create new features in the dataset
to boost model predictions. Additionally, adding relevant data from an
outside source (ie. Vancouver weather, Vancouver housing prices, etc.)
could be useful to create more meaningful features for the model to
train on. Finally, testing different model than LogisticRegressor,
RandomForestClassifier, and RidgeClassifier could also result in a
better performing model.

## References

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent">

<div id="ref-docopt" class="csl-entry">

de Jonge, Edwin. 2018. *Docopt: Command-Line Interface Specification
Language*. <https://github.com/docopt/docopt>.

</div>

<div id="ref-Numpy" class="csl-entry">

Harris, Charles R., K. Jarrod Millman, Stéfan J van der Walt, Ralf
Gommers, Pauli Virtanen, David Cournapeau, Eric Wieser, et al. 2020.
“Array Programming with NumPy.” *Nature* 585: 357–62.
<https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2>.

</div>

<div id="ref-Pandas" class="csl-entry">

McKinney, Wes et al. 2010. “Data Structures for Statistical Computing in
Python.” In *Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference*,
445:51–56. Austin, TX.

</div>

<div id="ref-sklearn" class="csl-entry">

Pedregosa, Fabian, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel,
Bertrand Thirion, Olivier Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, et al. 2011.
“Scikit-Learn: Machine Learning in Python.” *Journal of Machine Learning
Research* 12 (Oct): 2825–30.

</div>

<div id="ref-dataframe_image" class="csl-entry">

Petrou, Ted. 2018. *Dexplot: Dexplot Is a Powerful and Intuitive Python
Data Visualization Library Using Matplotlib for Both Long and Wide
Data*. <https://www.dexplo.org/dexplot>.

</div>

<div id="ref-tharwat2020classification" class="csl-entry">

Tharwat, Alaa. 2020. “Classification Assessment Methods.” *Applied
Computing and Informatics*.

</div>

<div id="ref-Data" class="csl-entry">

The Vancouver Police Department. 2021. *Vancouver Department Open Data*.
<https://geodash.vpd.ca/opendata/>.

</div>

<div id="ref-Python" class="csl-entry">

Van Rossum, Guido, and Fred L Drake Jr. 1995. *Python Tutorial*. Centrum
voor Wiskunde en Informatica Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

</div>

<div id="ref-altair" class="csl-entry">

VanderPlas, Jacob, Brian Granger, Jeffrey Heer, Dominik Moritz, Kanit
Wongsuphasawat, Arvind Satyanarayan, Eitan Lees, Ilia Timofeev, Ben
Welsh, and Scott Sievert. 2018. “Altair: Interactive Statistical
Visualizations for Python.” *Journal of Open Source Software* 3 (32):
1057.

</div>

</div>
